NTLM Authentication
NTLM authentication is used when
a client authenticates to a server
by IP address instead of by hostname,
or if the user attempts to
authenticate to a hostname
that is not registered on the Active
Directory integrated DNS server.
Third-party applications may also
choose to use NTLM authentication.
The NTLM authentication
protocol consists of seven steps.
In the first authentication step, the
computer calculates a cryptographic hash,
called the NTLM hash,
from the user’s password.
Next, the client computer sends
the user name to the server,
which returns a random value
called the nonce or challenge.
The client then encrypts the
nonce using the NTLM hash,
now known as a response,
and sends it to the server.
The server forwards the response
along with the username and the nonce
to the domain controller.
The validation is then performed
by the domain controller,
since it already knows the
NTLM hash of all users.
The domain controller encrypts
the challenge itself
with the NTLM hash of the supplied
username and compares it
to the response it received
from the server.
If the two are equal, the
authentication request is successful.
Next we will turn to Kerberos which is
the default authentication protocol
for Active Directory and
associated services.